
SECTIONS
SEARCH
SKIP TO CONTENTSKIP TO SITE INDEX
SUBSCRIBE FOR €0.50/WEEK

Account
SUBSCRIBER-ONLY NEWSLETTER

John McWhorter
OPINION
‘Woman’ and ‘Female’ Didn’t Start as Words About Men
July 1, 2022

Credit...Delcan and Co.

Give this article


John McWhorter
By John McWhorter

Opinion Writer

You're reading the John McWhorter newsletter, for Times subscribers only.  A Columbia University linguist explores how race and language shape our politics and culture. Get it with a Times subscription.
English words referring to or meaning “woman” have interesting histories. In the current political moment, I thought I might share some of them. Each can help us think about ways we may perceive the humanity around us.

The word “woman” did not begin as a reference to a “wo-” kind of man or male
person. In Old English, at first, a male was a “wer,” which is why a mythical
man who can transform into a wolf is called a werewolf. A female was a “wif,”
and though that word looks and sounds like “wife,” it didn’t refer exclusively
to a woman’s marital status — holding on in terms such as “midwife” and
“fishwife.”

Give this article


John McWhorter
A Columbia University linguist explores how race and language shape our politics and culture. Sign up for John McWhorter's newsletter, for Times subscribers only.

Read These Books About the Black Experience: One Old, One New, One Coming Soon
June 28

Sometimes ‘Proper’ Speech Isn’t Correct Speech
June 28

Republicans Want to ‘Harden’ Schools. That’s an Awful Euphemism.
June 14
More in Opinion

Brooke DiDonato/Agence VU/Re​dux
Pamela Paul
The Far Right and Far Left Agree on One Thing: Women Don’t Count
5h ago

J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press
David Brooks
Why on Earth Is Pelosi Supporting the Trumpists?
July 1
Continue reading the main story

Erin Schaff/The New York Times
Bonnie Kristian
The End of Roe, the End of Trump
July 1

Mark Peterson for The New York Times
Paul Krugman
Crazies, Cowards and the Trump Coup
June 30

Jose Luis Magana/Associated Press
Elizabeth Spiers
The Persistent Myth That Restricting Abortion Rights Won’t Affect the Rich
5h ago
Editors’ Picks
Solveig Gold at her home in Princeton, N.J.
Bryan Anselm for The New York Times
Solveig Gold Is Proud to Be the Wife of a ‘Canceled’ Princeton Professor
July 1

The Myth of North America, in One Painting
Jan. 31
A worker for a mining company in the Yukon made an important discovery while digging in the permafrost: the remarkably well-preserved body of a baby woolly mammoth.
Treadstone Equipment
Searching for Gold, Miners Discover a Frozen Baby Mammoth
2h ago
Most Popular
A Clunky Mask May be the Answer to Airborne Disease and N95 Waste
In Northern Ireland, Old Passions Are Smoldering Anew
A Mother and Her 3 Children Are Found Dead in a Minnesota Lake
Father Figure: The Tortured Life of George Michael
How Delta-8 THC Works — and Why Experts Are Worried About It
Opinion: Liars, Losers and the Lessons of ‘Antiques Roadshow’
How Common Is Pancreatitis After a Colonoscopy?
Seth Meyers Calls Out Fox News Hosts for Falling Speechless
Workers at Airports Have Had It
My Sister Did Me Wrong in Secret. Should I Tell Her I Know?
Subscribe to The Times to read as many articles as you like.
nytimes.com/subscription
Site Index
Site Information Navigation
© 2022 The New York Times Company
NYTCoContact UsAccessibilityWork with usAdvertiseT Brand StudioYour Ad ChoicesPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpSubscriptions
You’ve reached your limit of free articles.
This content is reserved exclusively for Times subscribers.
Special offer:

Get unlimited access for €0.50 a week.

€2.00 €0.50/week

Billed as €8.00 €2.00 every 4 weeks for one year

SUBSCRIBE NOW

You can cancel anytime.

Offer for a Basic Digital Access subscription is not open to current digital news subscribers. Your payment method will automatically be charged in advance the introductory offer rate every 4 weeks for 1 year, and after 1 year the standard rate every 4 weeks. Your subscription will continue until you cancel. Cancellation takes effect at the end of your current billing period. The print edition of The New York Times, Games, Cooking or Wirecutter are not included. Taxes may apply. Offer terms are subject to change.

© 2022 The New York Times Company HelpFeedback
